- We cannot have a discussion on modern application
architectures without taking a brief look
at where we have come from.
When I started writing code professionally,
end-tier architectures and monolithic applications
were the norm.
We used to build a single binary web artifact
and then decompose the application internally into layers.
You would build a data access layer
and then a business process layer,
and then a presentation layer on top of that.
Each of these layers would often then decompose
into layers themselves,
often in threes again, over and over.
This layered architecture still gives me chills
down my spine.
To think of the crazy pass through layers
that we would build just to satisfy the architecture.
What we did get, however, was separation of concerns
and decomposition of our code into functional components.
As monoliths continue to rule the environment,
we started to see an anti-pattern
that still hinders us today in many situations.
The coupling of code in monoliths make changes hard
and the older the application was,
the more coupling would develop.
In addition to the coupling issues,
monolithic applications require considerable time
to build, test, and deploy.
The issues with monolithic applications
compounded on top of itself as coupling causes code issues,
which could only be fixed with long cycles
from code fix to deploy
and the issues go on and on.
We then saw a shift, and that shift was to service-based
architectures,
specifically SOA, or service-oriented architecture.
While these decomposed our applications
into smaller modules, it brought about two new issues.
One is the web service technology was based on soap,
and while not a deal-breaker on its own,
it makes a lot of compromises to how the web works.
Every request for instance is not either okay
or an internal server error.
There are recoverable errors that can occur.
The second and more prevalent issue
is the aggregation layer itself.
While the aggregation layer can be written very thin,
the reality is that transformations of XML
and logic operations start getting added to the bus itself.
This added a new level of coupling,
now between internal and external elements
of the system as a whole.
SOA was however the hottest architecture pattern
of the time.
Enter into the picture microservices.
Now I would be the first to state
that microservices-based architectures
are not the silver bullet.
In fact, they bring their own sets of problems.
They do however have the promise of a more agile framework
that can be extended into a cloud native world
much easier than either monolithic applications
or SOA-based architectures.
The new rage of microservices is not an accident either.
The model fits well in both a web developer
and web service developer,
in part because HTTP is at the heart of the model.
As we begin to dig in,
keep in mind the trade-offs we take in microservices
and use that to evaluate if this architecture pattern
is for you.
Now we will dig into each of the patterns
in a little more depth
so we can focus on the lessons of the past
to make for a better future.